# 2.5 Summary

Computers encode information as bits, generally organized as sequences of bytes. Different encodings are used for representing integers, real numbers, and character strings. Different models of computers use different conventions for encoding numbers and for ordering the bytes within multi-byte data.

The C language is designed to accommodate a wide range of different implementations in terms of word sizes and numeric encodings. Machines with 64-bit word sizes have become increasingly common, replacing the 32-bit machines that dominated the market for around 30 years. Because 64-bit machines can also run programs compiled for 32-bit machines, we have focused on the distinction between 32- and 64-bit programs, rather than machines. The advantage of 64-bit pro-grams is that they can go beyond the 4 GB address limitation of 32-bit programs.

Most machines encode signed numbers using a two’s-complement representation and encode floating-point numbers using IEEE Standard 754. Understanding these encodings at the bit level, as well as understanding the mathematical characteristics of the arithmetic operations, is important for writing programs that operate correctly over the full range of numeric values.

When casting between signed and unsigned integers of the same size, most C implementations follow the convention that the underlying bit pattern does not change. On a two’s-complement machine, this behavior is characterized by functions $$T2U_w$$ and $$U2T_w$$, for a w-bit value. The implicit casting of C gives results that many programmers do not anticipate, often leading to program bugs.

Due to the finite lengths of the encodings, computer arithmetic has properties quite different from conventional integer and real arithmetic. The finite length can cause numbers to overflow, when they exceed the range of the representation. Floating-point values can also underflow, when they are so close to 0.0 that they are changed to zero.

The finite integer arithmetic implemented by C, as well as most other programming languages, has some peculiar properties compared to true integer arithmetic. For example, the expression x\*x can evaluate to a negative number due to overflow. Nonetheless, both unsigned and two’s-complement arithmetic satisfy many of the other properties of integer arithmetic, including associativity, commutativity, and distributivity. This allows compilers to do many optimizations. For example, in replacing the expression 7\*x by (x<<3)-x, we make use of the associative, commutative, and distributive properties, along with the relationship between shifting and multiplying by powers of 2.

We have seen several clever ways to exploit combinations of bit-level operations and arithmetic operations. For example, we saw that with two’s-complement arithmetic, \~x+1 is equivalent to -x. As another example, suppose we want a bit pattern of the form \[0, . . . , 0, 1, . . . , 1], consisting of w − k zeros followed by k ones. Such bit patterns are useful for masking operations. This pattern can be generated by the C expression (1<\<k)-1, exploiting the property that the desired bit pattern has numeric value $$2^k − 1$$. For example, the expression (1<<8)-1 will generate the bit pattern 0xFF.

Floating-point representations approximate real numbers by encoding numbers of the form x × $$2^y$$. IEEE Standard 754 provides for several different precisions, with the most common being single (32 bits) and double (64 bits). IEEE floating point also has representations for special values representing plus and minus infinity, as well as not-a-number.

Floating-point arithmetic must be used very carefully, because it has only limited range and precision, and because it does not obey common mathematical properties such as associativity.

### Bibliographic Notes

Reference books on C \[45, 61] discuss properties of the different data types and operations. Of these two, only Steele and Harbison \[45] cover the newer features found in ISO C99. There do not yet seem to be any books that cover the features found in ISO C11. The C standards do not specify details such as precise word sizes or numeric encodings. Such details are intentionally omitted to make it possible to implement C on a wide range of different machines. Several books have been written giving advice to C programmers \[59, 74] that warn about problems with overflow, implicit casting to unsigned, and some of the other pitfalls we have covered in this chapter. These books also provide helpful advice on variable naming, coding styles, and code testing. Seacord’s book on security issues in C and C++ programs \[97] combines information about C programs, how they are compiled and executed, and how vulnerabilities may arise. Books on Java (we recommend the one coauthored by James Gosling, the creator of the language \[5]) describe the data formats and arithmetic operations supported by Java.

Most books on logic design \[58, 116] have a section on encodings and arithmetic operations. Such books describe different ways of implementing arithmetic circuits. Overton’s book on IEEE floating point \[82] provides a detailed description of the format as well as the properties from the perspective of a numerical applications programmer.

{% hint style="info" %}
#### Aside --- Ariane 5: The high cost of floating-point overflow

Converting large floating-point numbers to integers is a common source of programming errors. Such an error had disastrous consequences for the maiden voyage of the Ariane 5 rocket, on June 4, 1996. Just 37 seconds after liftoff, the rocket veered off its flight path, broke up, and exploded. Communication satellites valued at $500 million were on board the rocket.

A later investigation \[73, 33] showed that the computer controlling the inertial navigation system had sent invalid data to the computer controlling the engine nozzles. Instead of sending flight control information, it had sent a diagnostic bit pattern indicating that an overflow had occurred during the conversion of a 64-bit floating-point number to a 16-bit signed integer.

The value that overflowed measured the horizontal velocity of the rocket, which could be more than five times higher than that achieved by the earlier Ariane 4 rocket. In the design of the Ariane 4 software, they had carefully analyzed the numeric values and determined that the horizontal velocity would never overflow a 16-bit number. Unfortunately, they simply reused this part of the software in the Ariane 5 without checking the assumptions on which it had been based.
{% endhint %}
